---
title: The Cloud Is Not Optional
---

When you hear that one of the vendors responsible for keeping government
organizations safe had a security breach, you can easily decide that this is
unacceptable. When you hear that it is hard to know who is affected and how
much, you may start to feel a bit panicked. This is bad; it would be far better
if it never happened.<!--more--> These are dangerous breaches. So you go find
out who made the mistake of allowing a system designed-to-be-safe to be broken
in. And you fire them or blast them for being idiots. And for making the world
worse for all of us.

After this, you can breeze a bit. The bad thing got fixed. The responsible has
been sacked or punished. We moved away from the affected vendors. We added new
systems to ensure we know who does the wrong thing and who is affected next
time. Everything got fixed. Nothing to see here; we can go back to sleep.

Or can we? Did we fix anything? Could we change these systems and punish these
people? Is it even possible to know who is affected? Did anyone do something
wrong? Was the previous system the best we could do, and did we make ourselves
more vulnerable by overreacting?

## The story of a security breach

A few days ago, by the time I wrote this, Microsoft had to deal with a breach of
some of the encryption systems they use for Office 365, particularly for the US
government. The details are unknown, but it seems the attackers used a
combination of extracting a Root key and some bugs and misconfiguration to
generate access tokens.

This has made a few people mad on the Internet, particularly around the question
of Cloud Security and trusting Cloud providers. There have been a lot of calls
in the press for organizations to not mindlessly move to the cloud, and to ask
themselves if centralizing all these security in a few vendors is not more
dangerous than keeping it on-premise, securely separated from others. After all,
it would be a less juicy target. You would need to breach multiple networks and
systems to get the same amount of information.

This is what I call "pink fluffy unicorn" solutions. Solutions and ideas that
make total sense in theory. I see where these people come from; I understand
what they are trying to do, and I see why they think it makes sense and could
help. And it could! If it was possible.

Just like I would be delighted if I could have a pink fluffy unicorn jumping on
rainbows, but that is not possible. I cannot have a pink fluffy unicorn for all
kinds of reasons. And most of these calls for "choosing the right balance
between centralized on cloud and separated" make a lot of sense. If they were
possible.

## Why are SaaS and Cloud use exploding at the infrastructure level?

Running an Internet-facing Digital Infrastructure service in 2023 is a prevalent
task. Most organizations need some, from the local group of plumbers to the US
Federal government. Even if you limit yourself to a certain level of safety and
national level security, you still get thousands of organizations across the US
and the world that have real pressing needs for this kind of service. And these
organizations will transfer and handle, through these services, a lot of
secrets.

Running these services well, with high uptime, well configured, and safely with
good security -both active and passive- is a tough job that necessitates a
certain set of skills and knowledge. It also needs an organization that can
hire, reward, support, and manage the teams and individuals doing this work. The
operators need knowledge and skills, and their management structure up to the
top has to be designed to support them and understand their needs. Otherwise,
they will be left to work with the wrong tools, budget, and constraints.

So what do we see when we look for individuals with this knowledge? That they
are not a lot of them. Every analysis of the tech job market talk of massive
deficits, with hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of unfulfilled jobs. With
an enormous shortage of talents and education pipelines that cannot train what
is needed. And this hold for every part of the field that would work on the
Digital Infrastructure, being for software engineers, sysadmins, operator,
Infosec specialists, CyberSecurity specialists, SRE, etc.

In 2023, if you want to run an Internet-Facing Digital Infrastructure service
for yourself, and if everyone that needed one tried to do it themselves, nearly
none of them could get the necessary people to do it. They do not exist. The
supply is too small. Nice try, it made sense, but you are chasing a pink fluffy
unicorn.

This is why we have all moved to the Cloud and SaaS vendors. Because it means
the limited supply of people with the skills to operate these services can be
shared between all the organizations that need them. These are outsourcing
shops. It is not outsourcing to reduce cost. It is outsourcing in order to share
rare skills, that we could not grow but that everybody needs.

## The Cloud is the least bad option

This is what all these yelling at Microsoft are missing. Did Microsoft do a
perfect job? No, of course not. Could they do better? Sure, they could. Maybe.
In a different universe. Would anyone running their office server do better, get
better forensics and attribution, or perhaps not have made the same
misconfiguration?

No. Come on. We all know this. All of our experience with organizations that run
their IT is atrocious. Hell, there are MMO guilds with better IT than the vast
majority of the organizations under these attacks. Good forensics? No-one has
them.

So yes. Let's do a proper system analysis of what happened here. What made the
people that operate these systems think they were doing the right thing? What
assumptions have the designers made about the world that is not true anymore?
Can we devise better taxonomies for our problems than "misconfiguration"? Do
these reports and "cause analysis" really help us get safer?

These are all questions worth asking. And if you want answers to these, there is
a whole community of people working on this in software in the shadows, I can
put you in touch if you care about getting results. But blasting a Cloud Vendor
for not doing "enough" and organizations for using it instead of running their
own? Send me a living and breathing pink fluffy unicorn first, and maybe I will
take you seriously. I mean it. Until then, please shut up, stay on the side, and
let the people trying to keep us all safe alone. You are taking up space.
